Document generated on 04/09/2026 10:10 a.m.

Ontario History

No Surrender: The Land Remains Indigenous by Sheldon
Krasowski

Emma Stelter

Volume 112, Number 2, Fall 2020

URI: https://id.erudit.org/iderudit/1072248ar
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7202/1072248ar

See table of contents

Publisher(s)

The Ontario Historical Society

ISSN

0030-2953 (print)
2371-4654 (digital)

Explore this journal

Cite this review

Stelter, E. (2020). Review of [No Surrender: The Land Remains Indigenous by
Sheldon Krasowski]. Ontario History, 112(2), 272–274.
https://doi.org/10.7202/1072248ar

Copyright © The Ontario Historical Society, 2020

This document is protected by copyright law. Use of the services of Érudit
(including reproduction) is subject to its terms and conditions, which can be
viewed online.

https://apropos.erudit.org/en/users/policy-on-use/

This article is disseminated and preserved by Érudit.

Érudit is a non-profit inter-university consortium of the Université de Montréal,
Université Laval, and the Université du Québec à Montréal. Its mission is to
promote and disseminate research.

https://www.erudit.org/en/

272

No Surrender
The Land Remains Indigenous

By Sheldon Krasowski

Regina: University of Regina Press, 2019. 392 pages. 
Paper $27.95. ISBN 9780889775961. 
(www.uofrpress.ca)

In No Surrender: The Land Remains In-

digenous,  historian  Sheldon  Krasowski 
adds  to  the  dialogue  on  treaty  nego-
tiations by locating a common negotiating 
strategy on the part of the Crown through 
which  colonial  agents  downplayed  land 
surrender in Treaties One to Seven in what 
is  now  known  as  Canada.  Although  the 
text  focuses  primarily  on  prairie  treaties, 
Krasowski’s key teachings apply trans-pro-
vincially.  First,  Indigenous  leaders  never 
agreed to surrender the land. Second, trea-
ties  should  be  studied  as  an  interrelated 
whole  or  “treaty  bundle,”  rather  than  as 
individual agreements because the bundle 
defines  the  relationship  between  Indig-
enous peoples and newcomers. Krasowski 
makes  clear  that  Indigenous  Elders  (who 
taught him) have been making these argu-
ments  for  years.  Krasowski  also  suggests 
that  the  bundle  approach  prompts  read-
ers (and future treaty historians) to recog-
nize the integral role of ceremony at treaty 
gatherings.1

Krasowski  argues  against  the  cultural 
misunderstanding  thesis  put  forward  by 
George  Stanley  in  1960  which  implies 
incompetent 
Indigenous  people  were 
negotiators  and  that  Crown  negotiators 
were  acting  benevolently.  Stanley’s  1960 
work  continues  to  shape  popular  misun-
derstandings  that  cultural  differences  led 
to a misunderstanding of the treaty terms. 
Through the lens of the treaty bundle and 
eyewitness accounts, Krasowski dismantles 

this perspective. The treaty bundle lens re-
veals  that  Canada’s  treaty  commissioners 
had a common negotiating strategy which 
only  discussed  the  benefits  of  the  treaties 
and  not  the  liabilities,  including  the  sur-
render clause. Krasowski bases this finding 
on a close reading of news reports, colonial 
correspondence, and original manuscripts 
(in addition to Elder testimony). Colonial 
officials also chose translators in favour of 
treaty-making. These points showcase that 
Crown negotiators never clearly expressed 
their intent to own Indigenous land. Kra-
sowski  demonstrates,  in  fact,  that  Indig-
enous Chiefs were expert negotiators who 
agreed  to  share  their  land  with  settlers  in 
exchange for treaty benefits such as annui-
ties and education. They did not agree to 
surrender it because cession was never dis-
cussed.  Despite  pressure  from  Ottawa  to 

ONTARIO HISTORYbook reviews

273

decrease treaty benefits, the treaty bundle 
demonstrates  that  the  goods  and  services 
secured  by  First  Nations  increased  with 
each successive treaty, suggesting coopera-
tion  and  information  exchanges  between 
First Nations. According to Krasowski, In-
digenous leadership took steps to prepare 
for negotiations with the Crown by gather-
ing information thus challenging Stanley’s 
thesis. 

Those  who  are  interested  in  learning 
more about the Numbered Treaties in the 
Ontario context would benefit from chap-
ters one and two which focus on negotia-
tions at Fort Frances in 1870-71 and Lake 
of the Woods in 1873. Krasowski includes 
a discussion on the controversy of outside 
promises  made  during  oral  negotiations 
that  were  not  added  to  the  treaty  texts 
produced by colonial agents. These exam-
ples continue to challenge Stanley’s thesis, 
showing us that Crown negotiators caused 
upset  by  failing  to  act  transparently.  Kra-
sowski could have included more petitions 
to the Crown over broken treaty promises 
in the first decade after signing to see what 
terms  of  the  treaties  were  violated  from 
First Nations’ perspectives. 

Following his treaty bundle approach, 
Krasowski identifies the importance of pre-
vious treaty making periods for the Num-
bered Treaties, such as the Upper Canada 
treaties  negotiated  from  1763  to  1850  in 
present day southern Ontario. These trea-
ties  provided  Indigenous  land  to  settlers 
and  marked  a  shift  away  from  the  previ-
ous  Peace  and  Friendship  treaties  which 
focused on ending hostilities and securing 
commercial  compacts.  During  the  Upper 
Canada treaties period, commissioners ad-
hered  to  Indigenous  protocols  for  treaty 
making,  as  demonstrated  through  their 
speeches which focused on kinship and the 
Royal  Proclamation  of  1763.  Indigenous 

Chiefs had agency during negotiations and 
employed  negotiation  tactics  that  were 
also  used  during  the  Numbered  Treaties. 
These  treaties,  particularly  the  Robinson 
Treaties, created an ideal template for the 
Numbered  Treaties  negotiations  because 
they described the clauses in general terms, 
selected reserve lands, and formalized an-
nuity payments. Researchers interested in 
the treaties in Ontario might be interested 
in  looking  at  this  complete  bundle  in  fu-
ture works. 

Krasowski’s  work  effectively  incor-
porates  Indigenous  oral  histories  and 
research  methodologies  by  viewing  the 
treaties as sacred undertakings confirmed 
through  ceremony.  By  doing  so,  he  reads 
the  conventional  written  texts,  such  as 
the  treaty  texts  and  Alexander  Morris’s 
Treaties of Canada with the Indians, with 
a more critical eye. By so doing, he more 
broadly  challenges  mainstream  stereo-
types that oral history is inherently invalid 
or that it conflicts with text-based sources. 
Rather, he demonstrates that oral history 
and  text-based  sources  complement  each 
other  and  are  necessary  to  understand 
treaty negotiations in what is now known 
as  Canada.2  No  Surrender  would  be  an 
appropriate  addition  to  undergraduate 
history  courses  covering  treaty-making 
because  of  Krasowski’s  treaty  bundle 
methodology and the amount of primary 
material he uses. In the graduate seminar 
context,  it  would  pair  well  with  Michael 
Asch’s  On  Being  Here  to  Stay:  Aboriginal 
and  Treaty  Rights  in  Canada  and  John 
Borrow and Michael Coyle’s The Right Re-
lationship because of their focus on rights 
and relationships in treaty-making. Heidi 
Bohaker, Brittany Luby, and Alison Nor-
man have spoken publicly about the mas-
culinist nature of treaty work to date and 
Krasowski’s  work  reinforces  the  need  to 

274

explore the role of women in treaty nego-
tiations  and  gatherings.  It  also  leaves  me 
wondering  about  the  role  of  women  and 
two-spirited people in these moments and 
related ceremonies, highlighting possibili-

ties for future research.

Emma Stelter 
MA  Candidate,  Department  of  History, 
University of Guelph 

1 Due to the sacred nature of ceremony, Krasowski keeps some of the interworking of 
ceremony private. Ceremonial teachings are often passed on through relationships with know-
ledge keepers and Elders. 

2 For other examples of scholars who examine stereotypes around oral history see: Bruce 

Granville Miller, Oral History on Trial: Recognizing Aboriginal Narratives in the Courts 
UBC Press, 2011 and Arthur J. Ray, “History Wars” and Treaty Rights in Canada, in The 
Power of Promise: Rethinking Indian Treaties in the Pacific Northwest., ed A. Harmon, Uni-
versity of Washington Press, 2008.

ONTARIO HISTORY